RELEASES: add a set of pre-release steps for Tendermint versions (#8786)
tendermint/tendermint: RELEASES.md

### Creating a backport branch

If this is the first release candidate for a minor version release, e.g.

> v0.25.0, you get to have the honor of creating the backport branch!

Author: > Not sure if this has been discussed before, but my personal preference is that backport branches do not have the v prefix.

I think that this is nice, but somewhat of an aesthetic change and I'd prefer we don't make changes to existing conventions like this without very very strong reason.

ensure Tendermint functions at the scale it will be used by application
developers and node operators.

### Nightly End-To-End Tests

The Tendermint team maintains [a set of end-to-end
tests](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/test/e2e/README.md#L1)
that run each night on the latest commit of the project and on the code in the
tip of each backport branch. These tests start a network of containerized
Tendermint processes and run automated checks that the network functions as
expected in both stable and unstable conditions. During the feature freeze,
these tests are run nightly and must pass consistently for a release of
Tendermint to be considered stable.

### Upgrade Harness

The Tendermint team is creating an upgrade test harness to exercise the
workflow of stopping an instance of Tendermint running one version of the
software and starting up the same application running the next version. To
support upgrade testing, we will add the ability to terminate the Tendermint
process at specific pre-defined points in its execution so that we can verify
upgrades work in a representative sample of stop conditions.

> ### Large Scale Testnets

Reviewer: One thing that hasn't been covered in this section is transactional load profiles. The e2e testnet only blows gently on the network. Alongside the aforementioned p2p scenarios we should also benchmark these large testnets under considerable load. It may simply be about firing transactions at a single node where the mempool has to be able to shed it or we could also expand it to more unique load situations including:
- Submitting to one or many different nodes
- Experimenting with bursts vs constant load
- Certain transaction properties (large txs, small txs, invalid txs)

Where the e2e testnet should focus on correctness, these large scale testnets are about focusing on performance aspects

Author: > Where the e2e testnet should focus on correctness, these large scale testnets are about focusing on performance aspects.

I definitely agree with this.

>Submitting to one or many different nodes
Experimenting with bursts vs constant load
Certain transaction properties (large txs, small txs, invalid txs)

I think that these could be more readily conceived of as benchmarks that are written as part of the unit test suite for the code. Go provides a nice set of tools for writing [function benchmarks](https://pkg.go.dev/testing#hdr-Benchmarks) that should be leaned on as much as possible for this kind of testing. I think we should focus these tests on things that are much more specific to large-scale deployments. The question of "How well does the mempool deal with a transaction load of profile XYZ" can easily be answered by writing a benchmark that generates many large or small tx and fires them quickly or in a bursty way. I'm not really sure we need to spin up a multi-hundred node network to understand that.

I'm also not certain this needs to happen with each release, but should happen when we make specific changes to the mempool itself.

Author: I think we should start with consistent load. The more profiles etc. that we test for, the more work we need to do to design and shape them in our tools and the more analysis we'll need to perform to understand what exactly we're seeing.

The Tendermint end-to-end tests run a small network (~10s of nodes) to exercise
basic consensus interactions. Real world deployments of Tendermint often have over 
a hundred nodes just in the validator set, with many others acting as full
nodes and sentry nodes. To gain more assurance before a release, we will also run
larger-scale test networks to shake out emergent behaviors at scale.

Large-scale test networks are run on a set of virtual machines (VMs). Each VM
is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM and 2 CPU cores. The network runs a very
simple key-value store application. The application adds artificial delays to
different ABCI calls to simulate a slow application. During each test net, the
following metrics are monitored and collected on each node:

* Tendermint rounds per height

> * Peers connected

Author: I'd propose 3 metrics:

Max over the interval
Min over the interval
Rate of change

For the rate of change metric, perhaps something like 'over the interval, what % of the time was the peer count changing?'

> * Peers connected

Reviewer: perhaps not a % of the time but just how many times i.e. the peer count changed 50 times in a minute

> * Peers connected

Author: Word, like a more normal rate. "Peer count changes per hour or minute"?

* Memory resident set size
* CPU utilization
* Blocks produced per minute
* Seconds for each step of consensus (Propose, Prevote, Precommit, Commit)
* Latency to receive each block proposal

For these tests we intentionally target low-powered host machines (with low core
counts and limited memory) to ensure we observe similar kinds of resource contention 
and limitation that real-world  deployments of Tendermint experience in production. 

#### 200 Node Testnet

To test the stability and performance of Tendermint in a real world scenario,

> a 200 node test network is run. The network comprises 5 seed nodes, 100

Reviewer 2: I think I agree with Evan. I know bigger testnets will have higher cost in terms of $$$ and time but we should test our product _at least_ in the same scalability conditions as it will be used on the field. I know it's not guarantee of catching the same problems (especially because the App will be different) but it's worth testing those conditions.

> a 200 node test network is run. The network comprises 5 seed nodes, 100

Author: Added language to indicate this should be considered when performance critical systems are changed.

> a 200 node test network is run. The network comprises 5 seed nodes, 100

Reviewer 3: I don't want to arrive late and reopen conversations, but following the same line of my previous comments, I believe that the level of detail on this document should be higher. In this case, in particular, we can mention that we run a testnet with a number of nodes (validators, non-validators, etc.) which is in line with Cosmos Hub, for instance. If the number of nodes in that network increases between releases, this document remain updated. 

In my opinion, the precise number of nodes using the testnet is a detail that we provide at each release, not in document that governs every release.

validators and 95 non-validating full nodes. All nodes begin by dialing
a subset of the seed nodes to discover peers. The network is run for several

> days, with metrics being collected continuously.

Reviewer 4: What are the targets for each of the metrics outlined above? I think we need to take a first stab at defining the values of a handful of those metrics to be able to know, with evidence, that the release is stable.

Reviewer 4: Yes, my point is that I want to see _numbers_ associated with each of those metrics :slightly_smiling_face: i.e. targets

Reviewer 5: It's valuable to distinguish between _indicators_ and _objectives_. Which metrics we are going to track (an example of indicators) is probably worth including in a general doc like this. Specific target values (i.e., objectives) are harder to estimate, and I don't think we should hold off on making any plans for the detailed task of figuring out what values to aim for. We can always add them later (and should), and in the meanwhile I think there's some communicative utility in documenting the outline of the plan.

Reviewer 4: Where do we then list the detailed objectives against which we're going to be testing releases? Ideally with some rational justification for the objectives. We need to write this down/communicate/agree on this somewhere.

Ultimately the artifact I'd like to see here would be a report that we can attach to each release to say, "this is the set of tests and objectives against which we tested this release in order to deem it release-worthy". The first draft test strategy will never be perfect, and we can naturally evolve the specific objectives and indicators over time as we gain insight into users' workloads and update our testing strategy accordingly.

 
#### Rotating Node Testnet

Real-world deployments of Tendermint frequently see new nodes arrive and old
nodes exit the network. The rotating node testnet ensures that Tendermint is
able to handle this reliably. In this test, a network with 10 validators and
3 seed nodes is started. A rolling set of 25 full nodes are started and each
connects to the network by dialing one of the seed nodes. Once the node is able
to blocksync to the head of the chain and begins producing blocks using
Tendermint consensus it is stopped. Once stopped, a new node is started and

> takes its place. This network is run for several days.

Reviewer 4: Same as above, what metric targets do we aim for here?

> takes its place. This network is run for several days.

Reviewer: I wonder how useful it would be to be able to modify the rate of change in a network. If 20 nodes drop at once how does it affect the network. Also do we want to consider rolling the validators?

Author: > I wonder how useful it would be to be able to modify the rate of change in a network.

I personally think: not very. Performing this rolling change means that we're resilient to this very common network pattern and I don't think it's clear to me what value will be added by changing the rate at which we roll.

We roll the validators in the e2e tests and that does seem stable. Is there something that rolling the validators in the large testnet will capture that we think would be missed in the smaller e2e tests?

well tested, stable, and suitable for adoption by the various diverse projects
that rely on Tendermint.

### Feature Freeze

Ahead of any minor version release of Tendermint, the software enters 'Feature
Freeze' for at least two weeks. A feature freeze means that _no_ new features
are added to the code being prepared for release. This period directly follows
the creation of the [backport branch](#creating-a-backport-branch). The
Tendermint team instead directs all attention to ensuring that the existing
code is stable and reliable. Broken tests are fixed, flakey-tests are remedied,
end-to-end test failures are thoroughly diagnosed and all efforts of the team
are aimed at improving the quality of the code. During this period, the upgrade
harness tests are run repeatedly and a variety of in-house testnets are run to
ensure Tendermint functions at the scale it will be used by application
developers and node operators.

### Nightly End-To-End Tests

The Tendermint team maintains [a set of end-to-end
tests](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/test/e2e/README.md#L1)
that run each night on the latest commit of the project and on the code in the

> tip of each backport branch. These tests start a network of containerized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tip of each supported backport branch. These tests start a network of containerized
```

Tendermint processes and run automated checks that the network functions as
expected in both stable and unstable conditions. During the feature freeze,
these tests are run nightly and must pass consistently for a release of
Tendermint to be considered stable.

### Upgrade Harness

The Tendermint team is creating an upgrade test harness to exercise the
workflow of stopping an instance of Tendermint running one version of the
software and starting up the same application running the next version. To
support upgrade testing, we will add the ability to terminate the Tendermint
process at specific pre-defined points in its execution so that we can verify

> upgrades work in a representative sample of stop conditions.

Reviewer: We should either change this to past tense or make sure we do once the upgrade harness is complete

Author: Added a todo to this effect.

Freeze' for at least two weeks. A feature freeze means that _no_ new features
are added to the code being prepared for release. No code changes should be made
to the code being released that do not directly improve pressing issues of code
quality. The following must not be merged during a feature freeze:

* Refactors that are not related to specific bug fixes.
* Dependency upgrades.
* New test code that does not test a discovered regression.
* New features of any kind.
* Documentation or spec improvements that are not related to the newly developed
code.

This period directly follows the creation of the [backport
branch](#creating-a-backport-branch). The Tendermint team instead directs all
attention to ensuring that the existing code is stable and reliable. Broken
tests are fixed, flakey-tests are remedied, end-to-end test failures are
thoroughly diagnosed and all efforts of the team are aimed at improving the
quality of the code. During this period, the upgrade harness tests are run
repeatedly and a variety of in-house testnets are run to ensure Tendermint
functions at the scale it will be used by application developers and node
operators.

> ### Nightly End-To-End Tests

Reviewer 6: If possible, I would rather see "nightly" tests redefined as long-running, "continual" tests, if there is not some notably prohibitive reason they must only run once in a 24h period.

Instead of "they begin running at midnight", the "long tests" logic would look something like this:

- Was a new commit pushed to `main`?
    - If yes, are the long tests running?
        - If no, begin them from this new commit to `main`
- Did the long tests just complete?
    - If yes, is there a newer commit to `main`?
        - If yes, start the long tests again from the newest commit

Running these tests continually gives faster feedback, potentially during working hours where action can be taken immediately. Running them more often offers more chances to discover flakiness or other incorrect test behavior.

If this is all out of scope of the current PR, I'm fine revisiting this later.

Author: I'd recommend taking a bit of a look at our current e2e testing strategies if you haven't already. We have, generally, two sets of end-to-end tests. 

https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/tree/v0.34.x/test/e2e

1. A simplified end-to-end test that runs one every commit within a pull request.
2. A longer set of end-to-end tests that runs once per backport branch each night.

The "nightly" tests exercise a combinatorial matrix of different features and configuration flags to make sure that various aspects of the system will work in tandem together. For example, do the "legacy" and "non-legacy" p2p systems produce blocks when used by different nodes on the same network? And, does p2p statesync work with legacy p2p nodes etc.

They run for about an hour. What you're describing sounds like running the nightlies, in effect, multiple times throughout the day when new code lands. I don't exactly have an issue with that pattern, but the tests produce a lot of data that can be tough crawl through so I'd be wary of adding a lot more noise.

these tests are run nightly and must pass consistently for a release of
Tendermint to be considered stable.

### Upgrade Harness

> TODO(williambanfield): Change to past tense and clarify this section once
> upgrade harness is complete.

The Tendermint team is creating an upgrade test harness to exercise the
workflow of stopping an instance of Tendermint running one version of the
software and starting up the same application running the next version. To
support upgrade testing, we will add the ability to terminate the Tendermint
process at specific pre-defined points in its execution so that we can verify
upgrades work in a representative sample of stop conditions.

### Large Scale Testnets

The Tendermint end-to-end tests run a small network (~10s of nodes) to exercise
basic consensus interactions. Real world deployments of Tendermint often have over 
a hundred nodes just in the validator set, with many others acting as full
nodes and sentry nodes. To gain more assurance before a release, we will also run
larger-scale test networks to shake out emergent behaviors at scale.

Large-scale test networks are run on a set of virtual machines (VMs). Each VM

> is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM and 2 CPU cores. The network runs a very

Reviewer 3: I think that the description below "low-powered host machines (with low core counts and limited memory)" is more in line with the level of detail I would expect in a such document.

> is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM and 2 CPU cores. The network runs a very

Author: @cason I'll respond here to the general issue with the level of detail in the document:

I think it useful to document the specific values for these experimental parameters. We want to demonstrate that each release is as good (hopefully better) than the previous release. If it is worse, then we want to understand in what dimension and by what magnitude the software is worse. Using a consistent set of values for memory, cpu, load etc. allow us to ensure we are being consistent across releases. 

These values should evolve over time. Memory is cheap and probably will get cheaper, so running with more memory will be fine and our benchmarks should change to reflect that but we should be deliberate about that change. 

There is nothing stopping us in the language of this document form pushing a bit beyond what's written here. For example, if we believe Tendermint can handle many more transactions per unit time than what this document lists, we should _also_ capture that in an experiment. However, having the consistent baseline will give us confidence that we have not regressed in any meaningful way.

simple key-value store application. The application adds artificial delays to
different ABCI calls to simulate a slow application. Each testnet is briefly
run with no load being generated to collect a baseline performance. Once
baseline is captured, a consistent load is applied across the network. This
load takes the form of 10% of the running nodes all receiving a consistent
stream of two hundred transactions per minute each.

During each test net, the following metrics are monitored and collected on each
node:

* Tendermint rounds per height

> * Maximum connected peers, Minimum connected peers, Rate of change of peer connections

Author: > This means maximum and minimum peer's count over all involved nodes?

I was considering, for the entire range beyond the beginning, what was the maximum number of peers attained by some node and what was the minimum number of peers attained by some node. Perhaps better metrics can be used here?

> Regarding the "rate of changes", this apply to specific nodes or the overall established connections?

For this, I was thinking network-wide. A way of understanding how frequently the entire network is changing peers.

> * Memory resident set size

Author: Go changed to use `MADV_DONTNEED` to fix this issue around the 1.15 release, so RSS should now be an accurate accounting of the memory in use by the program: https://github.com/golang/go/issues/42330. Using the OS's view of memory usage has the nice quality of a reflection of what users and operators will observe, so we'll be able to catch large changes between releases that users may notice even if they're cosmetic. I don't have strong objection to using the Go internal metric but I do think that the user view should be considered there.

* CPU utilization

> * Blocks produced per minute

Author: I'm not certain I understand the question, would you mind elaborating?

> * Blocks produced per minute

Reviewer 3: Tendermint produces a block at a time. So the latency for producing a block, computed as the interval between the commit of the previous block to the commit of the next block, is the main determinant for throughput. So, if we hypothetically produce a block per second, on average, the throughput will be 60 blocks per minute.

My question here is what of these metric is more relevant: the block latency distribution, or the block throughput, which is inversely proportional to the block latency?

> * Seconds for each step of consensus (Propose, Prevote, Precommit, Commit)

Reviewer 3: Again, this can be provided with more detail in the document produced at the end of release cycle, but which metric are we using here? Average, standard deviation, some high-percentile, maximum?

> * Seconds for each step of consensus (Propose, Prevote, Precommit, Commit)

Author: Good question, for each of these I was considering a set of percentiles. Perhaps p50, p95, and p999?

> * Latency to receive block proposals

Reviewer 3: This is not clear to me. Would this be time it takes for a proposed block to be delivered to all nodes, a quorum of nodes, some nodes? How can we compute latency precisely in this case, as send and receive time are measured using different clocks?

Author: Good question. There is a metric for this that was added in the latest version of Tendermint. This measures the time between when the block proposal message is received and when all of the block parts are received.

For these tests we intentionally target low-powered host machines (with low core
counts and limited memory) to ensure we observe similar kinds of resource contention 
and limitation that real-world  deployments of Tendermint experience in production. 

#### 200 Node Testnet

To test the stability and performance of Tendermint in a real world scenario,
a 200 node test network is run. The network comprises 5 seed nodes, 100
validators and 95 non-validating full nodes. All nodes begin by dialing
a subset of the seed nodes to discover peers. The network is run for several
days, with metrics being collected continuously. In cases of changes to performance
critical systems, testnets of larger sizes should be considered.

#### Rotating Node Testnet

Real-world deployments of Tendermint frequently see new nodes arrive and old

> nodes exit the network. The rotating node testnet ensures that Tendermint is

Reviewer 3: I would add "and crash".

In other words, I would consider and reinforce the support for crash-recovery. This a behavior, in my opinion, more common that nodes just leaving forever or joining for the first time.

I noticed that the experiment actually does that, from the following description, I would only describe this behavior here at higher level.

Author: I outline a different test for crash recovery, but this one isn't really about crash recovery. This test ensures that the network is able to tolerate large numbers of stale peers. It came about because, in the wild, we see nodes maintaining enormous peer stores due to new peers joining the network and then leaving. Someone testing the waters of joining a network quickly spins up a node, participates for a few days and then realizes that it's going to take upkeep to continue to run their node so they shut it down. This test scenario exists to ensure that we are resilient to this common user behavior.

able to handle this reliably. In this test, a network with 10 validators and
3 seed nodes is started. A rolling set of 25 full nodes are started and each
connects to the network by dialing one of the seed nodes. Once the node is able
to blocksync to the head of the chain and begins producing blocks using
Tendermint consensus it is stopped. Once stopped, a new node is started and

> takes its place. This network is run for several days.

Author: > Do we need to document what we do if this test discovers a serious regression?

I think the plan would pretty straightforwardly be that anyone involved in the suspicious code be involved immediately in debugging and diagnosing the problem.

> Can we run this long test in some continuous fashion such that we would discover a long term slowdown prior to code freeze?

I'm not opposed to this and I think this would bring some very nice benefits for observability and it would speed up the feedback loop on code changes. The issue is that a deployment like that needs a lot of care and feeding, with staffing to maintain the instances and implement and maintain the CI/CD pipelines to get the code out quickly. These are all things I would really love to have, but at the moment, without the dedicated support team, I'm hesitant to recommend doing that.

#### Network Partition Testnet

> Tendermint is expected to recover from network partitions. A partition where no

Reviewer 3: I would suggest to split the second sentence in two. The first affirming that a partition without a super-majority does not produce blocks. Concluding that if no partition has a super-majority, the network as whole does not produce blocks. 

In addition to the described scenario, I would consider one in which we have a minority partition that stops making progress (say, <n/3), while the main partition is still able to produce blocks. Once the minority partition reconnects with the main one, their nodes should catch up. We know that this scenario is also critical, as it poses additional workload on the main partition, which meanwhile should not stop producing new blocks.

subset of the nodes is left with the super-majority of the stake is expected to
stop making blocks. Upon alleviation of the partition, the network is expected
to once again become fully connected and capable of producing blocks. The
network partition testnet ensures that Tendermint is able to handle this
reliably at scale. In this test, a network with 100 validators and 95 full
nodes is started. All validators have equal stake. Once the network is
producing blocks, a set of firewall rules is deployed to create a partitioned
network with 50% of the stake on one side and 50% on the other. Once the
network stops producing blocks, the firewall rules are removed and the nodes
are monitored to ensure they reconnect and that the network again begins
producing blocks.

> #### Absent Stake Testnet

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if I get the point of this scenario. It seems pretty costly, and the actual data or unexpected behavior when can extract from it seems minimal.

I mean, consensus should work with 2/3+1 voting-power. Actually, working with exactly 2/3+1 (2f+1) is the best case for any BFT consensus protocols. The additional n/3 - 1 nodes just spare nodes, which are there for fault-tolerance. If they are offline, consensus will actually be faster than with them being involved.

Author: For a node to decide a value, it needs 2f+1 precommits for the value. If there are 3f+1 nodes on the network, then the node has _more_ nodes from which it can receive the votes that it requires. If there are only 2f+1 of the 3f+1 nodes active on the network, then the probability that we observe all of the votes we need to complete consensus decreases. This test ensures that, in the case that voting nodes are offline, the gossip mechanisms are still performant enough to gossip the necessary votes.

Reviewer 3: Ok, so I see this experiment more related to network reliability than consensus. In other words, we use consensus to attest that the overlay network ensures the delivery of messages when a substantial part of the nodes are not active, although (strictly) enough nodes are up.

6. Create a pull request back to master with the CHANGELOG & version changes from the latest release.
   - Remove all `R:minor` labels from the pull requests that were included in the release.
   - Do not merge the backport branch into master.

> 

Author: Done.

## Release Checklist

The following set of steps are performed on all releases that increment
the _minor_ version. These steps ensure that Tendermint is well tested, stable,
and suitable for adoption by the various diverse projects that rely on Tendermint.

### Feature Freeze

Ahead of any minor version release of Tendermint, the software enters a two week
'Feature Freeze'. A feature freeze means that _no_ new features or functionality

> are added to the code base. The Tendermint team instead directs all attention to
> ensuring that the existing code is stable and reliable. Broken tests are fixed,
> flakey-tests are remedied, end-to-end test failures are thoroughly diagnosed and
> all efforts of the team are aimed at improving the quality of the code. During
> this period, the upgrade harness tests are run repeatedly and a variety of
> in-house testnets are run to ensure Tendermint functions at the scale it will
> be used by application developers and node operators.

Reviewer 5: An optional terseness-related suggestion:

```suggestion
are added to the code base. During this period, the team will focus primarily 
on ensuring the code to be released is stable and reliable. This includes:

- Fixing tests that are broken or flaky.
- Root-causing end-to-end test failures and fixing any issues they reveal.
- Proactively running upgrade tests and medium- to large-scale in-house testnets.

The key goal in this period is to minimize risk for application developers and node operators who will adopt the release candidate.
```

As a side note, one interesting question here is _how_ to do meaningful upgrade testing. Unlike testnets, where we can pretty easily create a large example case on our own, many challenges of upgrading are more to do with the specifics of an application. We can and should exercise baseline upgrade functionality, but I'm not sure how we get to a real pre-production test of upgrades without "realish" data. The obvious tactic is to use golden data, but bitrot is a real hazard for its utility.

Reviewer: I still am of the view that there should be a strong enough degree of separation between Tendermint and the application that we should be able to treat application logic as a black box and not be overly concerned about the internals. There are parameters we should watch out for i.e. duration of ABCI calls, interplay between RPC and ABCI and so forth but we should be clear, when it comes to upgrading, as to what is on our side of the fence and that of the applications and be scoped on the assertions that we make when it comes to upgrading.

Author: > many challenges of upgrading are more to do with the specifics of an application.

I think we can get very far without use of a real application. I'm wondering if you can elaborate on what type of behavior you think requires a real-world application to test so we can discuss potentially mimicking it if need be.

### Nightly End-To-End Tests

The Tendermint team maintains a set of end-to-end tests that run each night
on the latest commit of the project. During the feature freeze, these tests are
run nightly and must pass consistently for a release of Tendermint to be

> considered stable.

Reviewer: If we're going to have a sentence or two in the other sections as to what these processes set to achieve or how they lead to an improved quality of release then we should also have one here. We can't assume that people reading this have the same degree of context that we do

Reviewer: Can we maybe link to the e2e documentation for more information

Author: Linked and added.

### Upgrade Harness

> The Tendermint team is in the process of creating an upgrade harness. This
> harness will test the process of stopping an instance of Tendermint running one
> version of the software and starting up the same application running the next
> version of Tendermint. This harness will be paired with the ability to crash the
> Tendermint process at a series of pre-defined places in the execution to allow
> the team to ensure that Tendermint successfully upgrades in many
> different start-stop combinations.

Reviewer 5: More optional wordsmithing suggestions:

```suggestion
The Tendermint team is creating an upgrade test harness to exercise the workflow 
of stopping an instance of Tendermint running one version of the software and starting up the same application running the next version.  To support upgrade
testing, we will add the ability to terminate the Tendermint process at specific
pre-defined points in its execution  so that we can verify upgrades work in a
representative sample of stop conditions.
```

### Large Scale Testnets

> The Tendermint end-to-end tests run Tendermint networks with a small set of nodes
> numbering in the low dozens at most. Real world deployments of Tendermint often
> have over a hundred nodes just in the validator set, with many others acting as full
> nodes and sentry nodes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Tendermint end-to-end tests run a small network (~10s of nodes) to exercise
basic consensus interactions. Real world deployments of Tendermint often have over 
a hundred nodes just in the validator set, with many others acting as full
nodes and sentry nodes. To gain more assurance before a release, we will also run
larger-scale test networks to shake out emergent behaviors at scale.
```

Each test network is run on a set of Digital Ocean virtual machines (VMs). Each
VM is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM, 2 CPU cores, and 80 Gigabytes of NVMe

> SSD storage. The network runs a very simple key-value store application. During

Reviewer: I would be wary of including too much "operation" based detail in this doc and limit it to the objectives that this pre-release process has (and potentially what it covers that others don't). Like the e2e tests we should have a more in depth doc in the respective directory that further outlines how to run it/what to do

Author: I think giving insight into how under powered the machines that we run the tests on are will help give a sense of how we're testing. I remove some of the specifics that don't really serve that communication goal. I think that as we operationalize the test networks, we should add more specific instructions for operators to run them easily. This should take the form of the README in the folder where the testnet code lives.

> Each test network is run on a set of Digital Ocean virtual machines (VMs). Each
> VM is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM, 2 CPU cores, and 80 Gigabytes of NVMe
> SSD storage. The network runs a very simple key-value store application. During
> each test net, the following metrics are monitored and collected on each node:
> * Tendermint Rounds per height
> * Peers connected
> * Memory resident set size
> * CPU utilization
> * Blocks produced per minute
> * Seconds for each step of consensus (Propose, Prevote, Precommit, Commit)
> * Latency to receive each block proposal

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Large-scale test networks are run on a set of Digital Ocean virtual machines (VMs). 
Each VM is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM, 2 CPU cores, and 80 Gigabytes of NVMe
SSD storage. The network runs a very simple key-value store application. During
each test net, the following metrics are monitored and collected on each node:

* Tendermint rounds per height
* Peers connected
* Memory resident set size
* CPU utilization
* Blocks produced per minute
* Seconds for each step of consensus (Propose, Prevote, Precommit, Commit)
* Latency to receive each block proposal
```

> VMs with low-end specifications are used on purpose. Many issues of resource
> contention that real-world deployments of Tendermint will see would not surface
> in our test application otherwise. To remedy this, we use produce
> a resource-constrained environment for testing Tendermint by running it on
> machines with small numbers of CPU cores and limited memory.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For these tests we intentionally target low-powered host machines (with low core
counts and limited memory) to ensure we observe similar kinds of resource contention 
and limitation that real-world  deployments of Tendermint experience in production. 
```

#### 200 Node Testnet

To test the stability and performance of Tendermint in a real world scenario,
a 200 node test network is run. The network comprises 5 seed nodes, 100
validators and 95 non-validating full nodes. All nodes begin by dialing
a subset of the seed nodes to discover peers. The network is run for several

> days, with metrics being collected continuously.

Reviewer: We should also look to involve light clients in some capacity

Reviewer: That's a good point. Perhaps there isn't really much advantage beyond the e2e tests

6. Create a pull request back to master with the CHANGELOG & version changes from the latest release.
   - Remove all `R:minor` labels from the pull requests that were included in the release.
   - Do not merge the backport branch into master.

> ## Minor Release Checklist

Author: No, you appear to be correctly. We treat minor versions like major versions at the moment. We aim to change this post 1.0 to treat major versions the way described in semver. I've updated the language in this document to reflect our actual practices at the moment.

The following set of steps are performed on all releases that increment
the _minor_ version. These steps ensure that Tendermint is well tested, stable,
and suitable for adoption by the various diverse projects that rely on Tendermint.

### Feature Freeze

Ahead of any minor version release of Tendermint, the software enters a two
week 'Feature Freeze'. A feature freeze means that _no_ new features are added

> to the code base. The Tendermint team instead directs all attention to ensuring

Author: > So that anyone working on changes that won't make it to the release is not blocked during this period.

Added this. I think having this period directly follow the created backport branch is a good idea. It signals that we have code that is done being added to.

> that the existing code is stable and reliable. Broken tests are fixed,

Reviewer 2: I would further say that any changes that are not directly related to the features to be shipped (bug fixes, new tests, etc.) should not be committed, to avoid devoting an important testing effort to a moving target.
Of course, high severity bugs, security fixes, fixes to previously shipped features, should still be committed.

Reviewer 2: > Dependency updates are the one of these items that we might want to omit from the list.

I don't really agree with this. I think we need a thorough discussion on this one.

If we devote a sizeable amount on time and effort at doing serious pre-release testing, we shouldn't be changing our systems on release branches unless it is for a good reason. We can't automatically be integrating dependency updates just because dependabot proposed it. When you change code that has been thoroughly tested, you are introducing risk. So at least we need to be convinced that the benefits outweigh the risks.

If we see that a dependency update is bringing a security fix, a serious bugfix that affects us, etc. then, I'm all for updating a release branch. But in that case, some effort has to be put (and planned for) into assessing the risks and benefits. Yes, it is not cheap, but I think it's a price worth paying for a software on which the entire Cosmos ecosystem depends.

Reviewer 4: > If we see that a dependency update is bringing a security fix, a serious bugfix that affects us, etc. then, I'm all for updating a release branch.

I definitely have to agree with @sergio-mena on this. We should treat dependabot's dependency updates as updates that we need to critically review, just like all other PRs.

In addition to the stability concerns that @sergio-mena raised, I see Go as the least likely ecosystem (as compared to JavaScript, Rust, etc.) to be affected by supply chain attacks _iff_ we review dependency updates a little more carefully (of course, it's a tradeoff there in terms of how much energy we're willing to spend doing such reviews vs working on new features/fixing bugs).

Otherwise we're just as susceptible to supply chain attacks as the JavaScript ecosystem.

Beyond this, I personally feel that we should be endeavoring to reduce the number of dependencies to the bare minimum in Tendermint over time anyways.

Author: I think that we should avoid merging dep changes during our code freezes, however, at the moment and with the current staffing level, thoroughly reviewing each dependency is frankly beyond the capacity of the team. Additionally, this is some what of a different conversation to the conversation of the release process that should probably be discussed elsewhere.

Author: @sergio-mena I've added discussion to this document to elaborate on what you suggested, please take a look.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @williambanfield, I read through the code and I 100% agree with it.
About reviewing dependencies, I think I have the same perspective: either we have the bandwidth to review them (and incorporate them into a code-frozen branch), or we don't merge them onto that branch (we can always merge to "master").

flakey-tests are remedied, end-to-end test failures are thoroughly diagnosed
and all efforts of the team are aimed at improving the quality of the code.
During this period, the upgrade harness tests are run repeatedly and a variety
of in-house testnets are run to ensure Tendermint functions at the scale it
will be used by application developers and node operators.

### Nightly End-To-End Tests

The Tendermint team maintains [a set of end-to-end
tests](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/test/e2e/README.md#L1)

> that run each night on the latest commit of the project. These tests start

Reviewer 2: They also run on the tip of all maintained backport branches

a network of containerized Tendermint processes and run automated checks that
the network functions as expected in both stable and unstable conditions.
During the feature freeze, these tests are run nightly and must pass
consistently for a release of Tendermint to be considered stable.

### Upgrade Harness

The Tendermint team is creating an upgrade test harness to exercise the
workflow of stopping an instance of Tendermint running one version of the
software and starting up the same application running the next version. To
support upgrade testing, we will add the ability to terminate the Tendermint
process at specific pre-defined points in its execution so that we can verify

> upgrades work in a representative sample of stop conditions.

Reviewer 2: [Not sure about this] We might also want to test the upgrading when the crash happens at unexpected (random?) places

### Large Scale Testnets

The Tendermint end-to-end tests run a small network (~10s of nodes) to exercise
basic consensus interactions. Real world deployments of Tendermint often have over 
a hundred nodes just in the validator set, with many others acting as full
nodes and sentry nodes. To gain more assurance before a release, we will also run
larger-scale test networks to shake out emergent behaviors at scale.

Large-scale test networks are run on a set of virtual machines (VMs). Each VM
is equipped with 4 Gigabytes of RAM and 2 CPU cores. The network runs a very
simple key-value store application. During each test net, the following metrics
are monitored and collected on each node:

* Tendermint rounds per height
* Peers connected
* Memory resident set size
* CPU utilization
* Blocks produced per minute
* Seconds for each step of consensus (Propose, Prevote, Precommit, Commit)

> * Latency to receive each block proposal

Author: At the moment, we don't really have any actual threshold for what these should be so I'm hesitant to document them at this time although we should develop them as we continue testing.

> * Latency to receive each block proposal

Author: @cmwaters do you have a proposed metric that might work here or a proposed scenario for rate of network discovery? 

Perhaps something along the lines of 'on a network with 200 nodes where 4 nodes are seed nodes, all non-seed nodes connect to 12 nodes within 2 minutes' or similar?

> * Latency to receive each block proposal

Author: @sergio-mena I have created https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/9006 to continue the discussion of baselines, please weigh in there if you have specific considerations you think should be captured.

> * Latency to receive each block proposal

Reviewer 2: Thanks. I've written my thoughts there in as structured a way as I could

validators and 95 non-validating full nodes. All nodes begin by dialing
a subset of the seed nodes to discover peers. The network is run for several
days, with metrics being collected continuously.
 
#### Rotating Node Testnet

Real-world deployments of Tendermint frequently see new nodes arrive and old
nodes exit the network. The rotating node testnet ensures that Tendermint is
able to handle this reliably. In this test, a network with 10 validators and
3 seed nodes is started. A rolling set of 25 full nodes are started and each
connects to the network by dialing one of the seed nodes. Once the node is able
to blocksync to the head of the chain and begins producing blocks using
Tendermint consensus it is stopped. Once stopped, a new node is started and
takes its place. This network is run for several days.

#### Absent Stake Testnet

Tendermint networks often run with _some_ portion of the voting power offline.
The absent stake testnet ensures that large networks are able to handle this
reliably. A set of 150 validator nodes and three seed nodes is started.
The set of 150 validators is configured to only possess a cumulative stake of 67%

> of the total stake. The remaining 33% of the stake is configure to belong to a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the total stake. The remaining 33% of the stake is configured to belong to a
```

validator that is never actually run in the test network. The network is run

> for multiple days, ensuring that it is able to produce blocks without issue.

Author: > Partial degradation: losses, increased delay (e.g., using "tc" or similar)

I'm not totally against this, but I'm not sure I see what specific class of issues would be identified by this type of testing. Tendermint will degrade under these conditions, as expected. Are there types of degradation that we expect this type of testing to catch that can't be caught in a simpler way? 

> Network partitions (which cause the chain to halt until it is healed)

I think this might be a better candidate for a simple e2e nightly test, since I'm not sure what will be caught at scale that wouldn't be caught in a simpler and smaller network. If there's a change that causes Tendermint to not behave correctly during partitions it will be due to a logic bug that is likely to be more difficult to catch and diagnose when we need to examine 100 nodes for evidence of the issue. 

The reasoning, imo, for the absent stake scenario is to test that vote and proposal propagation times are performant enough in large networks. With a lower % of stake, fewer (or no) votes can be missing or nil for a block to be committed. If there are degradation in Tendermint's ability to gossip messages, either due to consensus code changes, reactor changes, or p2p changes, they should show up in this kind of test while they are less likely to show up on the small scale.

> [maybe too much?] syn attack

I continue to be of the belief that network and TCP-level attacks should be concerns of the TCP stack and tools that are specifically designed for solving these problems and that this is both not something that we can reasonably test nor is it something we should specialize in. The solution to many of these types of attacks are standard fare, like firewalls w/ rate-limiting, disabling UDP, and turning on SYN-cookies none of which are really Tendermint's job.

> for multiple days, ensuring that it is able to produce blocks without issue.

Reviewer 2: I acknowledge that some of the problems that may surface with this type of tests could also be seen in _regular_ e2e tests. However:
* with a sizable network, we may stumble upon resource-related problems (e.g., memory, lock or network contention) that may not manifest in a smaller e2e network.
* these perturbations can (and will) definitely happen in the wild. Tendermint is not expected to operate normally _during_ those perturbations, but should continue unaffected once they stop (i.e., only liveness should be affected).

So, what I'm actually proposing is bootstrapping a sizeable network, having it reach normal operation, and then applying (one of) the mentioned perturbations for a few seconds (minutes?), and then verifying that the system resumes normal operation when the perturbations stop.

I prefer to bump into these problems _before_ the release for two reasons: (a) to be able to react earlier, when not all eyes are set on us, (b) in case a bad behavior is unfortunately detected later, in App testnets, or in production, we can show to what extent we went in our testing, as a way to help keep our users' confidence.

I think it is worth it for such a critical part of Cosmos, but that is just my opinion.

> for multiple days, ensuring that it is able to produce blocks without issue.

Reviewer 7: I agree with Sergio in the sense that this particular test is not testing performance only but correctness as well. We caught some problems in p2p for example when one peer is slow etc.

> for multiple days, ensuring that it is able to produce blocks without issue.

Reviewer 2: OK, I agree on the "slow and unwieldy" case, that's why this is typically only done once per release. And that's what justifies the "feature freeze" or "code freeze" you describe in the text (you can't be doing this as a CI step).

I'm not sure I fully agree on the part where you say "if we actually do catch an issue with correctness at this stage that it will be so difficult to understand". Yes, it will be difficult and involved, but it's still a problem that will need attention. And, again, I prefer to find this (if possible) before it hits our users. There it'll be as difficult, but on top, we'll have everyone's attention.

Anyway, the stages you have in the current version of the document seem reasonable to me, so if you add the network partition, I'm happy with the result.

> for multiple days, ensuring that it is able to produce blocks without issue.

Author: > Yes, it will be difficult and involved, but it's still a problem that will need attention.

Again, I completely agree. I am advocating that we try to do everything in our ability to catch issues before this stage because of the high cost of fully diagnosing.

> Anyway, the stages you have in the current version of the document seem reasonable to me, so if you add the network partition, I'm happy with the result.

Added a section, please take a look :pray:

> for multiple days, ensuring that it is able to produce blocks without issue.

Reviewer 2: @williambanfield , I just went through it and looks good to me. Thanks a lot
